README.md, before:

# anndata-metadata

**anndata-metadata** is a Python library and CLI tool for extracting metadata from [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/) `.h5ad` files, both locally and on S3. It provides utilities to summarize cell, gene, and matrix information, and supports batch processing of directories.

By using the `s3fs` library, you can avoid downloading large `.h5ad` files from S3 in order to extract metadata from them.
It can create a `.parquet` index of the metadata for all of the files in a directory (S3 or local).

## Library Overview

The core library is in `src/anndata_metadata/` and provides:

- **Metadata extraction**: Functions to extract key metadata (cell count, gene count, matrix format, group contents, etc.) from AnnData `.h5ad` files.
- **S3 and local support**: Utilities to process files both on local disk and in S3 buckets.
- **JSON-serializable output**: All metadata is returned as Python dictionaries with native types.

## CLI Usage (`main.py`)

The `main.py` script is a command-line tool to extract metadata from one or more `.h5ad` files.

**Usage:**
```sh
uv run python main.py <input_path> <output>
```
- `<input_path>`: Path to a file, directory, S3 URI, or S3 directory (e.g., `data/`, `s3://my-bucket/`).
- `<output>`: Output filename. Use `.json` for a single file, `.parquet` for directories, or `-` for stdout.

**Examples:**
```sh
uv run python main.py data/myfile.h5ad metadata.json
uv run python main.py data/ metadata.parquet
uv run python main.py s3://my-bucket/ metadata.parquet
```

## Development

### Setup

This project uses [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) for fast Python environment management.

1. **Install dependencies:**
   ```sh
   uv sync # this gets the dependenceis you need to run the command
   uv sync --group dev # this gets the dev dependencies for testing and formatting
   ```

2. **Run tests:**
   ```sh
   uv run pytest
   ```

3. **Format code:**
   ```sh
   uv run yapf --recursive . --in-place
   ```

4. **Type check (mypy):**
   ```sh
   uv run mypy
   ```

### Project Structure

- `src/anndata_metadata/extract.py`: Core metadata extraction logic.
- `main.py`: CLI entry point.
- `test/`: Unit tests for extraction functions.

# TODO

- [x] add mypy support
- [ ] add a wheel and submit to pypy
- [ ] CI/CD pipeline for updating pyp
- [ ] write partial results and skip previously written values

Commit message:

Prep for building submitting wheel to pypy

README.md, after:

# anndata-metadata

**anndata-metadata** is a Python library and CLI tool for extracting metadata from [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/) `.h5ad` files, both locally and on S3. It provides utilities to summarize cell, gene, and matrix information, and supports batch processing of directories.

By using the `s3fs` library, you can avoid downloading large `.h5ad` files from S3 in order to extract metadata from them.
It can create a `.parquet` index of the metadata for all of the files in a directory (S3 or local).

## Library Overview

The core library is in `src/anndata_metadata/` and provides:

- **Metadata extraction**: Functions to extract key metadata (cell count, gene count, matrix format, group contents, etc.) from AnnData `.h5ad` files.
- **S3 and local support**: Utilities to process files both on local disk and in S3 buckets.
- **JSON-serializable output**: All metadata is returned as Python dictionaries with native types.

## CLI Usage (`main.py`)

The `main.py` script is a command-line tool to extract metadata from one or more `.h5ad` files.

**Usage:**
```sh
uv run python main.py <input_path> <output>
```
- `<input_path>`: Path to a file, directory, S3 URI, or S3 directory (e.g., `data/`, `s3://my-bucket/`).
- `<output>`: Output filename. Use `.json` for a single file, `.parquet` for directories, or `-` for stdout.

**Examples:**
```sh
uv run python main.py data/myfile.h5ad metadata.json
uv run python main.py data/ metadata.parquet
uv run python main.py s3://my-bucket/ metadata.parquet
```

## Development

### Setup

This project uses [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) for fast Python environment management.

1. **Install dependencies:**
   ```sh
   uv sync # this gets the dependenceis you need to run the command
   uv sync --group dev # this gets the dev dependencies for testing and formatting
   ```

2. **Run tests:**
   ```sh
   uv run pytest
   ```

3. **Format code:**
   ```sh
   uv run yapf --recursive . --in-place
   ```

4. **Type check (mypy):**
   ```sh
   uv run mypy
   ```

5. **Run CLI**
   ```sh
   PYTHONPATH=src uv run python -m anndata_metadata
   ```

6. Build and test the wheel
   ```sh
   uv run python -m build
   ```
   and test it using
   ```sh
    python -m venv testenv
    source testenv/bin/activate
    pip install dist/anndata_metadata-*.whl --force-reinstall
    
   ```
   you will now be able to run the cli command like this
   ```
    anndata-metadata
   ```


### Project Structure

- `src/anndata_metadata/extract.py`: Core metadata extraction logic.
- `main.py`: CLI entry point.
- `test/`: Unit tests for extraction functions.

# TODO

- [x] add mypy support
- [ ] add a wheel and submit to pypy
- [ ] CI/CD pipeline for updating pyp
- [ ] write partial results and skip previously written values
